# ICEWS-Project

Forecasting conflict and conflict intensity at a granular temporal and spatial level is gaining growing attention in conflict literature. In this endeavor, to enhance the performance of conflict prediction models, theoretical variable selection and thus theory-driven models are becoming increasingly prominent. The focus of this project centers on the theory-driven novel semiparametric hierarchical hurdle model by Fritz et al. (2021). This model enables the prediction of monthly fatalities resulting from state-based conflicts at the geographically disaggregated level of 50x50km prio grid cells across the African continent. This project investigates whether dynamic information from the machine-based ICEWS event data set can improve the predictive power of the model. For this purpose, motivated and based on the paper by Blair and Sambanis (2020), monthly country-level variables were constructed that approximate the process of conflict escalation and de-escalation between the government and the opposition or rebels. The comparison of the out-of-sample performance, with and without the inclusion of the generated proxies, reveals that procedural variables in addition to structural variables provide a value added to the conflict prediction model. The contribution of the theoretically motivated proxies to the improvement of the model's predictive accuracy, however, remains within a limited range. The primary reason may lie in the limitations of the ICEWS data set, which are considered and investigated throughout the project, particularly with respect to the geographic encoding accuracy of the events.
